nixos/doc/immich: init (#344300)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/modules/services/web-apps/immich.md

# Immich {#module-immich}

*Source:* {file}`modules/services/web-apps/immich.nix`

*Upstream documentation:* <https://immich.app/docs/overview/introduction/>

[Immich](https://immich.app/) is a self-hosted photo and video management solution.

## Configuring {#module-immich-configuring}

A complete list of options for the Immich module may be found
[here](#opt-services.immich.enable).

> ### Basic setup {#module-immich-configuring-basic-setup}

Reviewer: Overall nit: make the subtitles more consistent in their capitalization :)

Author: They should be more consistent now. At the end I chose not to go with title case, as I felt it might be out of place.

Using the following configuration you can setup a basic installation of Immich:

```nix
{
  services.immich = {
    enable = true;

    # Optionally set a different location for your media files
    mediaLocation = "/my/immich/media";
  };
}
```

This will configure Immich and its components as well as Postgres and
Redis databases and users for Immich.

## Migrating from Upstream Docker Compose configuration {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose}

If you have been running Immich using the Docker Compose setup as
recommended by upstream, you can follow this guide to migrate your
existing installation to NixOS.

This guide is going to reference variables in its examples, so make
sure to either set those in your shell or replace them with the actual
values.

### Assumptions {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-assumptions}

> For the sake of this guide, we are going to assume a few things:

Author: ```suggestion
These are assumptions and goals for this migration:
```

1. Your current installation's database name and username is `immich`

> 2. Your NixOS installation's database name and username is going to

Author: ```suggestion
2. Your NixOS installation's database name and username are going to
```

   `TARGET_LOCATION`, which may be the same as `UPLOAD_LOCATION`.

### Stop your current Immich installation

To ensure data consistency, you should stop your current Immich
instance. Otherwise, your backups/database dumps might not be in
sync. Make sure to keep your current Postgres instance running, so we
can create database dumps later.

Example:
```console
# docker stop immich_server immich_machine_learning
```

### Create a Backup {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-backup}

First you want to make a backup of your existing database and photo
library. To do this, make a copy of or use a backup tool on
`UPLOAD_LOCATION`.

Example:

```console
# tar --create --zstd --file /var/backup/immich-library.tar.zst $UPLOAD_LOCATION
```

Next you should create a backup of your existing database. While this
guide is not going to modify the original database it might still be
advisable in case something goes wrong.

Example, assuming your Immich database is running in a container
named `immich_postgres`:

```console
# docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich -f /tmp/immich.sql
# docker cp immich_postgres:/tmp/immich.sql /var/backup/immich.sql
```

> I'd advise storing these backups in a safe location, at least until

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is advised to store these backups in a safe location, at least until
```
Avoid first person in docs

until you have confirmed that your new installation works.

### Configure Immich NixOS module {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-configure}

You can now enable Immich in your NixOS configuration as described in
[Configuring](#module-immich-configuring).

> After building and switching to your new configuration, you should

Author: ```suggestion
After building and switching to the new configuration, you should
```

stop the newly started `immich-server.service` and
`immich-machine-learning.service` units.

```console
# systemctl stop immich-server.service immich-machine-learning.service
```

### Create database dump {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-dump-database}

You might have done this already during your
[backup step](#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-backup).
You can choose to reuse that database dump by making a copy, or just
create another dump like this:

```console
# docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich -f /tmp/immich.sql
# docker cp immich_postgres:/tmp/immich.sql ./immich.sql
```

::: {.note}

> While `pg_dump` offers a few output formats, this guide relies on it

Author: ```suggestion
While `pg_dump` offers a few output formats, this guide relies on the format
```

> being `plain` (default), as we will have to modify it later.

Author: ```suggestion
being `plain` (default), as it will be modified in later steps.
```

:::

> ### Fixing up Database Dump  {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-fixup-dump}

Reviewer: nit: double space

The database dump generated by `pg_dump`, can most likely not be
imported as is. There are two changes we need to make, to allow it to
be imported correctly.

> First, we need to fix the `search_path` variable of the dump, as a bug

Author: Is it really a bug?

Reviewer 2: No, it's apparently an intentional security feature. I don't have a link handy but I ran into this and researched it at some point.

Author: I reworded this section.

in PostgreSQL's `earthdistance` extension seems to cause issues when
importing database dumps that contain its units.
(See [this StackOverflow comment](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49702964/postgres-import-to-rds-could-not-execute-query-error-type-earth-does-not-ex#comment86441215_49702964))
To work around this issue, we can adjust the `search_path` variable
in the database dump. This variable is set within the first 20
lines of your database dump, so you can just open up your database
dump in your preferred text editor and apply the following changes:

> ```diff

Author: Is `diff` user friendly?

Reviewer 2: Even if it isn't, I don't know of a better format.

--- a/immich.sql
+++ b/immich.sql
@@ -10,7 +10,7 @@ SET lock_timeout = 0;
 SET idle_in_transaction_session_timeout = 0;
 SET client_encoding = 'UTF8';
 SET standard_conforming_strings = on;
-SELECT pg_catalog.set_config('search_path', '', false);

> +SELECT pg_catalog.set_config('search_path', 'public', false);

Reviewer 3: The immich documentation at https://immich.app/docs/administration/backup-and-restore also adds `pg_catalog`.
```suggestion
+SELECT pg_catalog.set_config('search_path', 'public, pg_catalog', false);
```

 SET check_function_bodies = false;
 SET xmloption = content;
 SET client_min_messages = warning;
```

The next issue we will need to work around is that Immich' Docker

> deployment caused all your image files to be referenced relative to

Author: ```suggestion
deployment caused all library files to be referenced relative to
```

its working directory (`/usr/src/app` inside the container). This

> means that all of your photos, videos and thumbnails are going to

Author: ```suggestion
means that all of photos, videos and thumbnails are going to
```

appear with the path prefix `upload/` in the database dump, as

> immich stores its data in `./upload` relative to its working directory

Author: ```suggestion
Immich stores its data in `./upload` relative to its working directory
```

by default. See
[Immich "Files Custom Locations" documentation](https://immich.app/docs/guides/custom-locations/)
for more information.

In order to fix these file paths in our database dump, we can use the
following `sed` command:

```console

> # sed "s#upload/(.*)/#$TARGET_LOCATION/\1/#g" ./immich.sql > ./immich-new-path.sql

Reviewer: I may not understand this, but is this the total path? Like for instance:
`upload/image.png`
should be sed'd to:
`/var/lib/immich/photos/image.png`?
so TARGET_LOCATION should be:
`/var/lib/immich/photos`

correct me if im wrong. Or is this relative to `mediaLocation`? I know this is explained but maybe provide an example :p

Author: It seems that Immich stores paths based on the value of `IMMICH_MEDIA_LOCATION`. For Docker deployments that value was `./upload`, and for NixOS it's going to be `$TARGET_LOCATION`

So we want to replace the relative `upload/` path with an absolute `$TARGET_LOCATION`.

Author: I have expanded on this a little bit in the documentation. I also added another assumption up top that `TARGET_PATH` is absolute

guide is not going to modify the original database, it might still be
advisable in case something goes wrong.

Example -- assuming your Immich database is running in a container
named `immich_postgres`:

```console
# docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich > /var/backup/immich.sql
```

::: {.warning}
Do not add `-t`/`--tty` to the `docker` command when using it in a
pipe. Using this option will combine STDOUT and STDERR, as well as
potentially print control characters. This is undesirable when dumping
a database, as output other than the actual SQL commands might get
written to the database dump.
:::

It is advised to store these backups in a safe location, at least
until you have confirmed that your new installation works.

### Configure Immich NixOS module {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-configure}

You can now enable Immich in your NixOS configuration as described in
[Configuring](#module-immich-configuring).

After building and switching to the new configuration, you should
stop the newly started `immich-server.service` and
`immich-machine-learning.service` units.

```console

> # systemctl stop immich-server.service immich-machine-learning.service

Reviewer 2: Nit: It's slightly cleaner to stop these via the provided slice as that includes all of Immich's services in case there are any new ones in the future.

```suggestion
# systemctl stop system-immich.slice
```

for more information.

To work around this issue, you need to adjust the `search_path`
variable in the database dump. Run the following `sed` command to do
so:

```console
# sed "s/SELECT pg_catalog.set_config('search_path', '', false);/SELECT pg_catalog.set_config('search_path', 'public, pg_catalog', true);/g" ./immich.sql > ./immich-fixed-search-path.sql
```

The next issue we will need to work around is that Immich' Docker
deployment caused all library files to be referenced relative to its
working directory (`/usr/src/app` inside the container). This means
that all photos, videos and thumbnails are going to appear with the
path prefix `upload/` in the database dump, as Immich stores its data
in `./upload` relative to its working directory by default.
See [Immich "Files Custom Locations" documentation](https://immich.app/docs/guides/custom-locations/)
for more information.
In summary, the goal is to replace the `upload/` prefix with the new
*absolute* media location path `TARGET_LOCATION`.

In order to change these file paths in the database dump, we can use
the following `sed` command:

```console

> # sed "s#upload/(.*)/#$TARGET_LOCATION/\1/#g" ./immich-fixed-search-path.sql > ./immich-final.sql

Reviewer 4: For some reason, my installation was using absolute paths like `/usr/src/app/upload/thumbs/...` for some paths, but not all. I had to use `sed -E "s#(^|\s)(/usr/src/app/)?upload/([^\t]+)/#\1/srv/large/photos/immich/\3/#g" ./immich-fixed-search-path.sql > ./immich-final.sql`.

GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA vectors TO immich;
GRANT USAGE, SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA public TO immich;
GRANT USAGE, SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA vectors TO immich;
```

Once the above statements have been executed, you may exit the
interactive `psql` console by entering `\q` or pressing `Ctrl + D`.

Now we can import the modified database dump using the following
command:

```console
# sudo -u postgres psql immich < ./immich-final.sql
```

After this command finishes, you can exit `psql` either by pressing
`Ctrl + D` or entering `\q`.

Now as a final step, you need to ensure the correct ownership of your
media library path:

<!-- Do NOT add a / to the end of this example command, as running it
  with an unset variable will cause everything on the rootfs to
  change ownership! -->
<!-- Perhaps this should have a warning about this? -->
```console
# chown -R immich:immich $TARGET_LOCATION
```

### Start migrated Immich installation {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-starting}

Now that we prepared the database as well as the media location, we can finally start Immich and its other components:

```console

> # systemctl start immich-server.service immich-machine-learning.service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# systemctl start system-immich.slice
```

*Source:* {file}`modules/services/web-apps/immich.nix`

*Upstream documentation:* <https://immich.app/docs/overview/introduction/>

[Immich](https://immich.app/) is a self-hosted photo and video management solution.

## Configuring {#module-immich-configuring}

A complete list of options for the Immich module may be found
[here](#opt-services.immich.enable).

### Basic setup {#module-immich-configuring-basic-setup}

Using the following configuration you can setup a basic installation of Immich:

```nix
{
  services.immich = {
    enable = true;

    # Optionally set a different location for your media files
    mediaLocation = "/my/immich/media";
  };
}
```

This will configure Immich and its components as well as Postgres and
Redis databases and users for Immich.

## Migrating from Upstream Docker Compose configuration {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose}

If you have been running Immich using the Docker Compose setup as
recommended by upstream, you can follow this guide to migrate your
existing installation to NixOS.

This guide is going to reference variables in its examples, so make
sure to either set those in your shell or replace them with the actual

> values.

Author: `.env` probably doesn't contain `TARGET_DIRECTORY`

is located at `./immich.sql`.

::: {.note}
While `pg_dump` offers a few output formats, this guide relies on the
`plain` (default) format, as it will be modified in later steps.
:::

### Fix up database dump {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-fixup-dump}

The database dump generated by `pg_dump`, can most likely not be
imported as is. There are two changes we need to make, to allow it to
be imported correctly.

<!-- TODO: Is the following actually a Postgres bug? -->
First, we need to restore value of the `search_path` variable of the
dump, as PostgreSQL will otherwise be unable to import data that
makes use of its `earthdistance` extension.
See [this StackOverflow comment](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49702964/postgres-import-to-rds-could-not-execute-query-error-type-earth-does-not-ex#comment86441215_49702964)
and [Immich "Backup and Restore" documentation](https://immich.app/docs/administration/backup-and-restore/)
for more information.

To work around this issue, we can adjust the `search_path` variable
in the database dump. This variable is set within the first 20
lines of your database dump, so you can just open up your database

> dump in your preferred text editor and apply the following changes:

Reviewer 2: Opening a DB dump in a text editor has issues. It'd be better to just put another `sed` command here.

Author: Done

   `TARGET_LOCATION`, which may be the same as `UPLOAD_LOCATION`.
5. Both `UPLOAD_LOCATION` and `TARGET_LOCATION` are absolute paths.

### Stop current Immich installation {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-stop-immich}

To ensure data consistency, you should stop your current Immich
instance. Otherwise, your backups/database dumps might not be in
sync. Make sure to keep your current Postgres instance running, so we
can create database dumps later.

Example:
```console
# docker stop immich_server immich_machine_learning
```

### Create a backup {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-backup}

First you want to make a backup of your existing database and photo
library. To do this, make a copy of or use a backup tool on
`UPLOAD_LOCATION`.

Example:

```console
# tar --create --zstd --file /var/backup/immich-library.tar.zst $UPLOAD_LOCATION
```

Next you should create a backup of your existing database. While this
guide is not going to modify the original database it might still be
advisable in case something goes wrong.

Example, assuming your Immich database is running in a container
named `immich_postgres`:

```console

> # docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich -f /tmp/immich.sql
> # docker cp immich_postgres:/tmp/immich.sql /var/backup/immich.sql

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich > /tmp/immich.sql
```

Author: I had bad experiences with piping content to/from Docker commands. If you ever add `-t` to a docker exec call, all output will be combined into `stdout` so your piped data would include errors/warnings too.
Maybe we can still apply your suggestion, but with a warning about adding `-t`.

```

It is advised to store these backups in a safe location, at least
until you have confirmed that your new installation works.

### Configure Immich NixOS module {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-configure}

You can now enable Immich in your NixOS configuration as described in
[Configuring](#module-immich-configuring).

After building and switching to the new configuration, you should
stop the newly started `immich-server.service` and
`immich-machine-learning.service` units.

```console
# systemctl stop immich-server.service immich-machine-learning.service
```

### Create database dump {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-dump-database}

You might have done this already during your
[backup step](#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-backup).
You can choose to reuse that database dump by making a copy, or just

> create another dump like this:
> 
> ```console
> # docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich -f /tmp/immich.sql
> # docker cp immich_postgres:/tmp/immich.sql ./immich.sql
> ```

Reviewer 2: DRY ;)

```suggestion
create another dump as described in that section.
```

in `./upload` relative to its working directory by default.
See [Immich "Files Custom Locations" documentation](https://immich.app/docs/guides/custom-locations/)
for more information.
In summary, the goal is to replace the `upload/` prefix with the new
*absolute* media location path `TARGET_LOCATION`.

In order to change these file paths in the database dump, we can use
the following `sed` command:

```console
# sed "s#upload/(.*)/#$TARGET_LOCATION/\1/#g" ./immich.sql > ./immich-new-path.sql
```

This `sed` command makes use of capture groups as just replacing every
occurrence of `upload/` would break paths referencing
`upload/upload/`. In order to replace just the prefix, and not all
occurrences of `upload` the left-hand-side also captures the path
segment after `upload/`.

### Prepare new database and library {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-prepare-db}

To ensure that the new database does not contain any residual data
from the brief time Immich was started on the system, we are going to
drop all existing data. To do so, first start an interactive `psql`
session as the Postgres superuser in the `immich` database:

```console

> # sudo -u postgres psql immich

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we be running this as the immich user so set up permissions correctly from the get-go?

```suggestion
# sudo -u immich psql immich
```

Author: I *think* some of the extensions couldn't be created when I tried as `immich`.

psql (15.8)
Type "help" for help.

immich=#
```

Now enter the following SQL code to recreate the database schemas:

::: {.warning}
**THIS IS GOING TO DELETE ALL DATA IN THE IMMICH DATABASE**. Ensure
that you are logged into the right database and that no valuable data
is going to be deleted in the `public` and `vectors` schemas.
:::

<!-- Ensure this snippet is up to date with the module. -->
<!-- TODO: Provide a migration script that utilizes the init script generated by the module? -->
```sql
-- Drop existing schemas
DROP SCHEMA public CASCADE;
DROP SCHEMA vectors CASCADE;

-- Create schemas and extensions
CREATE SCHEMA public;

CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS unaccent;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS "uuid-ossp";
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS vectors;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS cube;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS earthdistance;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_trgm;

-- Grant access to immich user
ALTER SCHEMA public OWNER TO immich;
ALTER SCHEMA vectors OWNER TO immich;
GRANT SELECT ON TABLE pg_vector_index_stat TO immich;

-- Optionally "update" extension (this is technically a noop)
ALTER EXTENSION vectors UPDATE;
```

> After recreating the database using the previous snippet, you can now
> import your database dump. First make sure your modified database dump
> is in a location readable by the `postgres` user.
> 
> Example:
> 
> ```console
> # chmod 600 ./immich-new-path.sql
> # chown postgres ./immich-new-path.sql
> # mv ./immich-new-path.sql /tmp/immich-new-path.sql
> ```
> 
> After moving the dump to a readable location, you can run the
> following command in `psql` console, to load and execute the database
> dump:
> 
> ```sql
> \i /tmp/immich-new-path.sql
> ```
> 
> After this command finishes, you can exit `psql` either by pressing
> `Ctrl + D` or entering `\q`.

Reviewer 2: It should be possible to simplify this down to something like:

```suggestion
```console
# sudo -u immich psql immich < ./immich-new-path.sql
```
```

No need to muck with permissions that way.

Now as a final step you need to ensure the correct ownership of your
media library path:

<!-- Do NOT add a / to the end of this example command, as running it with an unset variable will cause everything on the rootfs to change ownership! -->

> <!-- Perhaps this should have a warning about this? -->

Reviewer 2: Ugh, bash...

   `TARGET_LOCATION`, which may be the same as `UPLOAD_LOCATION`.
5. Both `UPLOAD_LOCATION` and `TARGET_LOCATION` are absolute paths.

### Stop current Immich installation {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-stop-immich}

To ensure data consistency, you should stop your current Immich
instance. Otherwise, your backups/database dumps might not be in
sync. Make sure to keep your current Postgres instance running, so we
can create database dumps later.

Example:
```console
# docker stop immich_server immich_machine_learning
```

### Create a backup {#module-immich-migrating-from-docker-compose-backup}

First you want to make a backup of your existing database and photo
library. To do this, make a copy of or use a backup tool on
`UPLOAD_LOCATION`.

Example:

```console
# tar --create --zstd --file /var/backup/immich-library.tar.zst $UPLOAD_LOCATION
```

Next you should create a backup of your existing database. While this
guide is not going to modify the original database, it might still be
advisable in case something goes wrong.

Example -- assuming your Immich database is running in a container
named `immich_postgres`:

```console

> # docker exec immich_postgres pg_dump --username immich immich -f /tmp/immich.sql > /var/backup/immich.sql

Reviewer 5: This will create an empty file at `/var/backup/immich.sql`. You need to drop the `-f /tmp/immich.sql` so that `pg_dump` uses stdout.

Author: Good catch!

that you are logged into the right database and that no valuable data
is going to be deleted in the `public` and `vectors` schemas.
:::

<!-- Ensure this snippet is up to date with the module. -->
<!-- TODO: Provide a migration script that utilizes the init script generated by the module? -->
```sql
-- Drop existing schemas
DROP SCHEMA public CASCADE;
DROP SCHEMA vectors CASCADE;

-- Create schemas and extensions
CREATE SCHEMA public;

CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS unaccent;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS "uuid-ossp";
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS vectors;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS cube;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS earthdistance;
CREATE EXTENSION IF NOT EXISTS pg_trgm;

-- Grant access to immich user
ALTER SCHEMA public OWNER TO immich;
ALTER SCHEMA vectors OWNER TO immich;
GRANT SELECT ON TABLE pg_vector_index_stat TO immich;

-- Optionally "update" extension (this is technically a noop)
ALTER EXTENSION vectors UPDATE;
```

Once the above statements have been executed, you may exit the
interactive `psql` console by entering `\q` or pressing `Ctrl + D`.

Now we can import the modified database dump using the following
command:

```console

> # sudo -u postgres psql immich < ./immich-final.sql

Reviewer 5: If run like this, the immich user will not have any privileges on the new database objects. I had to run

```sql
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO immich;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA vectors TO immich;
GRANT USAGE, SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA public TO immich;
GRANT USAGE, SELECT ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA vectors TO immich;
```

after the import.

Author: Hmm, interesting. I don't think this was needed in my case. But I guess it wouldn't hurt doing this just in case.
